The Project Gutenberg EBook of Report of a special committee of the City
Council, on the improvement of the Fire D, by City Council Halifax (N.S.)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Report of a special committee of the City Council, on the improvement of the Fire Department
       and also, on the best means of obtaining an additional
       supply of water for fire purposes, for the city of Halifax,
       N.S.

Author: City Council Halifax (N.S.)

Release Date: December 25, 2016 [EBook #53803]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                                 REPORT
                                  OF A
                 Special Committee of the City Council,
                                 ON THE
                              IMPROVEMENT
                                 OF THE
                            FIRE DEPARTMENT.
                               AND ALSO,
 ON THE BEST MEANS OF OBTAINING AN ADDITIONAL SUPPLY OF WATER FOR FIRE
                PURPOSES, FOR THE CITY OF HALIFAX, N. S.


                            HALIFAX, N. S.:
                     JAMES BARNES & CO., PRINTERS.
                                 1859.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                REPORT.


The Committee appointed to take into consideration, the condition of the
Fire Department of this City, and also, the best means of obtaining an
additional supply of Water, for Fire purposes, beg to present their
Report.

Before proceeding to the subject matter of their Report, the Committee
deem it due to themselves, and to the community, to make one or two
explanations, by way of accounting for apparent neglect of a most
important enquiry. The Committee was first appointed, immediately
subsequent to the great conflagration of 9th September, but they had
scarcely commenced their labours, when the Committee was disorganized,
by the retirement of several members, consequent upon the Annual Civic
Elections. The choice of officers and other necessary business,
prevented the appointment of a new Committee until late in October,
since which time, the members of this Committee, being much occupied
with other Committees, as well as with their own private affairs, it was
not possible to report at an earlier date.

The Committee, also, take this opportunity of stating, that they do not
hold themselves accountable for any communications, anonymous or
otherwise, upon this question, which may have appeared in the
newspapers.

The Committee have directed their attention to the several papers
submitted to them by the Council; as follows:

1st. Memorial of Edward J. Longard; received by the City Council 11th
March, 1859.

2nd. Memorandum of Alderman Twining; submitted 9th August, 1859.

3rd. Letter from Hon. Wm. Young, A. Scott and H. Hartshorne to His
Worship the Mayor, dated 12th September, 1859.

4th. Letter from the Secretary of the Halifax Water Company to His
Worship the Mayor, dated 13th September, 1859.

The Memorial of Mr. Longard, proposes a scheme for supplying the City
with Water, for Fire purposes, exclusively;—the supply to be drawn from
the Birch Cove Lakes.

The Memorandum of Alderman Twining suggests the appointment of a
Committee, to enquire into the expediency, and feasibility, of
purchasing the Water Works, and property, of the Halifax Water Company.

Messrs. Young, Scott and Hartshorne’s Letter has reference to the late
Fire, and makes certain suggestions, relating thereto, such as, the
laying down of additional Water Pipes, the use of Steam Fire Engines,
and the enlargement of the Fire Companies.

The Communication from the Secretary of the Water Company embodies a
proposition from the Company, agreeing to adopt the suggestion of
Messrs. Young, Scott and Hartshorne by “laying down a 12-inch pipe from
the Ball Court, at the south end of Gottengen Street, to Brunswick
Street, and thence continued south along Barrack Street to Sackville
Street; and lead 6-inch branch pipes therefrom, down Sackville, Prince,
George, Duke and Buckingham Streets, to Sackville Street; laying a new
6-inch pipe along Hollis Street, between Sackville and Buckingham
Streets; the branch pipes to have a suitable number of fire-plugs
attached to them, and to be used solely for fire purposes; for the
annual rent or sum of three hundred and fifty pounds.”

The Committee have named the several papers in the order of their
respective dates, but do not propose discussing them in that connexion.
Indeed the whole subject naturally divides itself into two branches,—the
improvement of the Fire Department, and an additional supply of Water.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In reference to the Fire Department, the first topic the Committee had
under consideration, and indeed, as far as they were capable of judging,
the principal defect of the Department, was the admitted want of
Firemen. The whole number of regular efficient Firemen, in the city,
does not exceed one hundred, whereas, in the opinion of this Committee,
there ought to be, at least, four hundred. Less than that number will
not suffice for the proper working of the Engines. It then becomes a
question whether the present Engine Company should be enlarged, or a new
Company formed, with a different set of duties. The Committee incline to
the latter view.

If the business of the Union Engine Company were confined, solely, or
chiefly, to the charge of the Engines, the Hose, and the Gear,—as,
indeed, it should be,—it is the opinion of the most experienced Firemen,
that the present Union Engine Company is strong enough for that purpose;
all that is required, is a Company of able-bodied men to assist in
working the Engines, after they are brought to the scene of action.
Without any doubt, such a Company could be raised in the city; but a
difficulty arose, as to the question of compensation. The Union Engine
Company, as is well known, receive compensation by the remission of road
money, and exemption from certain civic duties. A similar rule is
followed in other cities, and in some—such as Boston, for
instance—Firemen receive a direct remuneration in money.—In the last
named city, in the year 1851, the amount paid for services of Firemen
alone, without reference to any other expense of the Fire Department,
exceeded fifteen thousand pounds,—a sum greater, in fact, than the whole
revenue of our city. The pay of ordinary members of the Fire Companies
in Boston, is one hundred dollars _per annum_, for each man.

It is obvious, that we cannot venture to imitate such liberality as
that. Neither is it to be forgotten, that the payment of three or four
hundred men, either by remission of taxes, or by wages in money, would
withdraw just so much, from our available resources. Take, for instance,
the lowest sum proposed for direct payment—that is, ten dollars, a year,
for each man. Three hundred men, at ten dollars each, will make £750; a
sum which looks small, in comparison with the munificence of Boston; yet
still, a very large sum for us. On the other hand, it has been urged,
that any sum that we could afford to pay, would be really no
consideration to any man above the condition of a pauper, and would fail
to attract those whose co-operation it is most desirable to secure. If
the respectable classes—the merchants, tradesmen, householders, and
above all, the young men, natives or residents, of the city, would look
at this matter in its proper light, there would be no necessity for the
offering of any inducement, beyond what would be suggested by public
duty, and mutual protection. In former times, there were Fire Companies
in Halifax, and efficient ones too, based upon such principles; then why
not reorganize such Companies? The Committee are convinced, it would be
doing great injustice to the members of the Union Engine Company, to
suppose, that they give their zealous and valuable services from no
higher motive, than for the sake of the paltry privileges allowed them.

The time may come, when the population and wealth of the city may
warrant other arrangements, but in the meantime, and for some time to
come, the Committee believe we must trust largely to voluntary exertion.
It is, therefore, recommended, that a Company, or Companies, of not less
than 50 able-bodied men, be raised in each of the six wards of the city,
to be organized into one or more brigades, for the purpose of assisting
at Fires, by working the Engines; and that the duty of organizing said
Companies, in all 300 men, be left in the hands of the Firewards. The
Committee have much pleasure in adding, that the Chairman of Firewards,
D. Murray, Esq., has entered warmly into the project, and has
undertaken, with the aid of his fellow-citizens, to carry it out.

The Committee cannot dismiss this part of the subject without some
reference to the Military and Naval Departments. On behalf of the
citizens, the Committee acknowledge with gratitude, the exertions of Her
Majesty’s Soldiers and Sailors, at Fires, in times past; but it is not
to be denied, that the presence and active assistance, of so large a
force of disciplined men, on such occasions, has led to a most culpable
supineness, on the part of the inhabitants generally.

This state of affairs is not creditable, and has not unfrequently served
to promote feelings of jealousy and irritation, which it is hoped, the
formation of the proposed Company, will in future, have a tendency to
prevent. At the same time, it is gratifying to perceive that the General
Commanding has freely tendered the use of the Troops, in future, at
Fires,—provided, the proper application be made for their services.

Upon the suggestion of the Firewards, the Committee recommend, that His
Worship, the Mayor, or the Chairman of Firewards, may have power to make
application to the General Commanding, for the use of the Troops at
Fires; and that, in the absence of His Worship the Mayor, any two
Aldermen; or in the absence of the Chairman of Firewards, any two
Firewards, shall have the same power.

The question of Steam Fire Engines next engaged the attention of the
Committee. These machines, it appears, are coming into extensive use in
other places. They have been successfully introduced into the Fire
Departments of Philadelphia, Baltimore, Boston, and other cities in the
United States. In Boston, there are several, which are said to be
working very satisfactorily. The Mayor of Boston states that, they are
gradually taken the place of the common Hand-engines, and that, in
consequence of their introduction, he hopes next year, to be able to
reduce the expense of the Fire Department, some 20 or 30 thousand
dollars.

The exertion necessary to work fire engines, by hand labour, is so
exhausting, that it is very desirable steam power should be used, if
possible. To be really useful, however, with us, Steam Fire Engines
should be portable, and constructed on such a principle, as not to be
easily put out of order. From the Report of the Special Committee
appointed to make trial of Steam Fire Engines in Boston, last year, it
appears, that of 4 Engines—the best that could be procured—one weighed,
7,330 lbs., another, 7,480 lbs., another, 9,330 lbs., and the fourth,
9,415 lbs. The shortest time occupied in raising steam to 60 lbs.
pressure, from cold water, was 10½ minutes. The greatest horizontal
distance thrown of a single stream of 1¼ inches, through 200 feet of
hose, was 163 feet, and the greatest vertical height 110 feet. This does
not seem a very wonderful performance, but the advantage is, that a
Steam Engine would continue to throw such a stream as long as it was
supplied with fire and water. On the other hand, the weight, being three
or four tons, would require, at least four horses to move one of them on
a level, and six horses, when it would be necessary to ascend a hill.
The cost of one of these Engines, in Boston, is about three thousand
dollars.

As a Steam Fire Engine would be of comparatively little use, until the
city is better supplied with water, and as it is highly probable that a
cheaper and lighter class of steam machines will be introduced before
long, the Committee think it would be wise to make further enquiry
before purchasing a Steam Fire Engine, and suggest that His Worship the
Mayor shall take such steps, by correspondence, or otherwise, as will
put the Council in possession of the latest information on this point.

This brings the Report to the discussion of what is after all, the real
difficulty—the obtaining of a more abundant supply of water.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The Directors of the Halifax Water Company, in a statement recently
submitted to the public, complain of some want of courtesy, on the part
of the City Council, and of this Committee, in reference to their
proposition, previously described. The Committee regret this slight
misunderstanding, as they are very sure the omission adverted to, was
accidental, and was not intended to be disrespectful.

There is, however, an inconsistency in the statement of the Water
Company. The document sets out by shewing the anxiety of the Directors
to give an additional supply of water, and to make such arrangements as
would ensure the city against the recurrence of terrible visitations by
Fire; thereby intimating their opinion, that a better supply was
required.—In the concluding part of the same statement, they undertake
to prove, very confidently, that on the night of 9th September last,
there was an ample supply of water in the pipes; some of the plugs being
so full as to burst the hose; and that the alleged inefficiency was not
in accordance with the facts. If such was really the case, the Committee
cannot understand how the Directors of the Water Company can expect the
city to pay three hundred and fifty pounds yearly, for an additional
supply of water, for fire purposes, when, it may be inferred from their
argument, an additional supply was unnecessary.

Apart from this discrepancy, the Directors of the Water Company, now
propose to lay down a 12-inch pipe, by the Ball Court to Brunswick
Street; thence south by Barrack Street to Sackville Street, with 6-inch
pipes down all the intermediate streets; and a 6-inch pipe in Hollis
Street, from Sackville to Buckingham Streets.

The Committee have no doubt this would be an improvement as far as it
goes; though it differs, very widely, from the views of Mr. Stone, the
gentleman sent out from England to enquire into the cause of the late
Fire. According to Mr. Stone’s notions, as detailed by him, in a
memorandum submitted to the Committee, there should be a main pipe of
not less than 3 feet, from the Long Lake to St. Andrew’s Cross; then a 2
feet main to the south end of Barrack Street, and another, to the north
end of Brunswick Street, with 12-inch mains in every principal street of
the city.

It may be said, these are merely the opinions of an Agent of the
Insurance Offices, and that his views are extreme; yet it should be
remembered that Mr. Stone has had very large and long experience in such
matters, which ought, in justice, to give his opinions great weight. St.
John, New Brunswick, is supplied by a 12-inch and a 24-inch main; the
24-inch main being, of itself, equal to five 12-inch mains. These two
main pipes empty into a tank, which again supplies 6 mains of 12 inches
each, which, with other main pipes, chiefly 10-inch—and none less than
4-inch—are distributed over the city.—There are 93 fire plugs in St.
John, exclusive of 18 in Portland,—while we have but 43.

But even supposing the proposed additions of the Water Company to be
sufficient for the central part of the city,—it is evident, that after
the additional pipes are laid, the north and south districts of the city
will be quite as badly provided as before. The offer of the Water
Company, in fact, proposes to protect a part of the city, in
consideration of a certain sum, which must, of course, be derived from
assessment levied upon the whole; with this additional disadvantage,
that were a Fire to break out in the part unprotected,—which is chiefly
of wood,—it might gain such headway, as to endanger every part alike. It
does not affect the argument, that the new pipes are to be laid down in
the most valuable business portions of the city; inasmuch, as the north
and south districts include vast numbers of houses both of rich and
poor; and surely, it must be admitted, that the lives and dwellings of,
at least, one half of the population, most of whom would pay their
proportion of the fire tax, are as much entitled to protection, as the
warehouses and merchandize of the other half.

The Committee are of opinion that £350 in addition to the £650 already
paid, is too large a sum to pay yearly, for a protection, limited in
extent, and of somewhat doubtful efficiency. They recommend, therefore,
that the offer of the Water Company be not accepted.

The two remaining topics are the most important of all, as they
contemplate large operations, and heavy expenditures.

At this stage of the enquiry, it may not be uninteresting, nor
uninstructive, to shew, what efforts other cities have made, to obtain
the inestimable benefits, of an abundant supply of pure water.

The New Water Works of Glasgow, lately inaugurated by Her Majesty the
Queen, cost a million and a half of pounds sterling, or about three
pounds sterling per head of the population. The Liverpool Water Works
cost about the same sum. New York has expended twenty millions of
dollars on her Water Works, or about forty dollars per head of the
population, and the works are still in progress. The Boston Cochituate
Works have cost some six millions of dollars, or about thirty dollars
per head; while in our own British Provinces, Montreal has expended four
hundred and twenty thousand pounds, or twenty-four dollars per head, and
Quebec two hundred and twenty-eight thousand pounds, or twenty dollars
per head. To come still nearer home, we may instance St. John, New
Brunswick. The population of St. John is not much greater than the
population of Halifax; her wealth and resources, certainly not superior
to our own. St. John has embarked one hundred thousand pounds in her
Water Works, and considers the investment, one of the best, in every
sense, ever made for the city.

It will thus be seen, that we are somewhat behind the age, in this, as
in some other matters. To be prepared for a liberal outlay, in some mode
or other, is in fact, scarcely optional with us any longer. If we refuse
to pay for water, we will be obliged to pay a larger tax in some other
way. Supposing the rates of insurance to be doubled—as they may be;
there is, at once, an extra sum of ten or twelve thousand pounds to be
paid, every year, in cash—a sum more than sufficient to pay the interest
on a capital of £150,000. To say nothing of protection from Fire, and
the large amount which would be saved in the way of insurance, which a
really efficient system of Water Works would give us, there are the
additional considerations of health, cleanliness, and the promotion of
manufacturing industry. Then, there is the question of Sewerage, which,
before many years, will be forced upon this Council, but which, without
an abundance of water, will be absolutely unmanageable. It is impossible
to over-estimate the beneficial effects of a plentiful supply of water.
It would be worth some thousands of pounds, every year, if our city
could, thereby, be effectually relieved of the one single nuisance of
dust, which every Summer pollutes our atmosphere, and spoils our goods.
The Committee trust these remarks will not be deemed irrelevant.

The Resolutions of Alderman Twining, in reference to the purchase of the
Halifax Water Company’s Works, are, of course, based upon the
presumption, that the Company are willing to sell. The Committee have
reason to believe this to be the fact, though they are not, at present,
in a position to state, precisely, what sum would be required for the
purchase. It certainly, however, would not exceed £50,000; probably,
something less than that amount would suffice.

Upon the general principle involved in Alderman Twining’s Resolutions,
the Committee think there can hardly be much difference of opinion. They
are firmly persuaded, it would be greatly to the advantage of the
community, for the city government to have control of all such works.
But there are some grave points which ought to be discussed, previous to
the opening of negotiations with the Water Company. To make these works
thoroughly efficient, for every requirement of the city, and having
reference to the future, as well as the present,—an expenditure of not
less than forty or fifty thousand pounds, will be necessary. This is a
startling statement, but, upon examination, it will be found to be not
very wide of the mark.

It is a well known fact, that the water will not rise, with any force,
in the north suburbs of the city; in the vicinity of the North Barracks,
for instance; which, before ten years will be a very populous district.
It is laid down, as a rule of engineering, that the efficiency and value
of any system of water supply, is in direct proportion to the quantity
of water which can be stored with sufficient head, as near as possible
to the points of consumption. The water systems of New York and Boston,
though so enormously costly, are said, still, to be defective, from the
want of head pressure; the nature of the ground not permitting better
arrangements. These defects, in the water systems of the cities alluded
to, are in some measure remedied, by larger main pipes, and by
reservoirs.

Now, it has been ascertained by the actual measurements of Mr. Gossip,
that the plug at the corner of North and Gottingen Streets is, in fact,
higher than the point where the water pipes diverge at St. Andrew’s
Cross; while the long ridge to the westward and northward of North
Street, is 197 feet above low water mark,—being as high, if not higher,
than the surface level of the Long Lake. When it is borne in mind, in
addition, that the lake itself, is five miles distant, without any
intervening reservoir,—we have in these facts, a sufficient explanation
of the inefficiency of the Water Works at the North end of the city. The
same reasoning applies though in a less degree, to the south suburbs,
where the ground is lower; yet the distance, operating with an extended
system of distribution, deprives the water of the necessary force.

To make the present Water Works, therefore, thoroughly efficient, for
fire purposes, and for the supply of every part of the city, would
involve, first,—the laying down of larger pipes, from the lake, and
through the city; second,—the construction of a reservoir sufficiently
elevated to command the highest streets; and thirdly,—the cost of
machinery, suitable for the purpose of keeping the reservoir always full
of water.

The Committee are under the impression, that the improvements indicated,
cannot be effected, at a cost, much, if any, less than the sum named. It
is true, that for many purposes, the present Water Works, might be made
with a comparatively small outlay, to answer tolerably well for some
years to come; but in the all-important matter of protection from fire,
it is their belief, that any patching of the present system, is mere
trifling; the only result of which will be, to waste money, and to
engender a false security; which may possibly terminate in some
calamity, more serious than any that has yet occurred. When the water
was first introduced into St. John—some years ago—the engineer
recommended the laying down of a 24 inch instead of a 12 inch main, but
the difference of cost—some £12,000, was thought to be an insuperable
objection, and the 12 inch main was laid. Not many years after, the
citizens of our sister city, lost one hundred and fifty thousand pounds,
in one night, simply from the want of a sufficient supply of water.

It was the inefficiency of our Water Works for fire purposes, that first
turned Mr. Edward Longard’s attention to this subject. The Committee
will leave the further consideration of Alderman Twining’s Resolutions,
for the present, in order to explain Mr. Longard’s scheme. As an
intelligent native mechanic, and an experienced fireman, who has devoted
much time, and thought, to the question of water supply, it is but fair
to Mr. Longard, to state his views in detail.

Starting with the conviction, that the Long Lake can never afford
sufficient head pressure, by the natural power of gravitation,—Mr.
Longard proposes to bring the water from the Birch Cove Lakes, into a
Reservoir, to be built on Shaffroth’s hill, and thence, by three main
pipes into the city,—one for the north—another for the middle—and
another for the south district. The Birch Cove Lakes having an elevation
of 237 feet, which might be raised by damming to 240, or even to 245
feet, would be sufficient, without mechanical aids, to fill the
reservoir on Shaffroth’s hill; the summit of which is some 230 feet
above the sea, and admirably situated for commanding the whole city.
From this height, the water would descend upon the city, throughout its
whole length, with such force, that the present Engine Company would be
able, without assistance, either from the citizens, or the military, to
subdue a fire, in far less time, than it could possibly be accomplished
by 500 men, with the present defective water-system.

“By the proposed scheme, 16 efficient jets could be concentrated on any
point in the city below Barrack street, each jet delivering, at least,
100 gallons a minute—in all 1600 gallons each minute; and in all the
higher and suburban parts of the city an ample supply would be
furnished.”

Mr. Longard computes the cost of this work not to exceed £40,000, and
that the interest and other annual expenses, would not be over £2600,
while the saving in insurance alone, would be, at least, double that
amount; leaving a yearly surplus, of clear gain to the citizens, of some
£2500.

The Committee are free to admit, that, in their judgment, Mr. Longard’s
scheme is simple and intelligible, and supported by facts and arguments,
which cannot fail to produce a strong impression on the public mind. The
calculation of saving, in the item of insurance, is a most modest one,
Mr. Longard having based it upon a supposed reduction of one-eighth per
cent, while the probability is, that one half per cent would be much
nearer the truth. The very first year after the introduction of the
Croton Water into New York, the premiums of insurance were reduced, on
an average, 40 cents on the hundred, while the expenses of the Fire
Department, which had previously been seventy thousand dollars, fell the
same year, to thirty thousand. The want of water, this year, will impose
an extra tax, upon our own citizens, of certainly not less than ten
thousand pounds.

Were there no Water Works already in Halifax, the Committee would have
no hesitation in recommending Mr. Longard’s scheme for the adoption of
the Council. There are, however, certain advantages to be derived from
the purchase of the Water Company’s Works, which ought not to be
overlooked. There is the great advantage of having so much work already
done, and an income at once available; which income, the Committee
believe, might be considerably increased, by judicious management, under
civic control, without becoming a grievance to any citizen.

The Committee are very loth to assume the responsibility of advising in
this matter, but they have arrived at certain conclusions, which they
now submit for the consideration of the Council.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The present Committee was called into existence, chiefly for the purpose
of considering the best mode of obtaining a larger supply of water for
fire purposes; but the Resolutions of Alderman Twining, which were
submitted to the Council previous to the Great Fire, having been
referred to this Committee,—the field of enquiry is, thereby,
proportionally enlarged. Indeed, the Committee feel, that they have now
the whole question of water supply for the city before them, and the
exigencies of the time demand, that it should be dealt with in a
comprehensive spirit.

Taking this broad view of the question, the Committee, then, have two
schemes presented for their consideration; either of which, for about
the same cost, it is believed, may be made to answer every requirement
of the city; and to each of which, certain peculiar advantages, and
disadvantages, appertain.

Supposing the purchase of the Halifax Water Company’s Works, which, at
present, barely suffice for domestic purposes, to require £50,000; it
would require another £50,000, to make them efficient for fire purposes,
and for the supply of the upper parts of the city. But an advantage
would be gained by having a great part of the work already completed.

On the other hand, supposing Mr. Longard’s scheme to be adopted; the
carrying out of this scheme, solely for fire purposes, would cost some
forty or fifty thousand pounds, while to extend it through the city, so
as to make it available for every purpose, would cost some fifty
thousands additional; beside keeping the streets in confusion for years
to come.

It is thus apparent, that neither scheme is perfect, and that either
scheme fully developed, so as to be made capable of supplying the wants
of the whole city, would cost, somewhere in the neighbourhood of
£100,000.

Such being the state of the case, and assuming no better plan to be
presented to the Council, the Committee suggest, whether, upon the
whole, it would not be best for the city, partially to adopt both
schemes, and thereby secure the advantages of each, without incurring
the inconveniences of either. The Committee have an impression that the
present Water Works could be purchased, and put in good working order,
for a sum, not exceeding £50,000; and that for another £50,000—perhaps
for less money—an ample supply might be obtained, by Mr. Longard’s
scheme, for fire purposes, and for the supply of the higher parts of the
city. The cost of both schemes, would thus, not exceed, what it would be
necessary to expend, to make either scheme perfect; and the city would
enjoy the unquestionable benefit of having two sources of water supply,
instead of one.

The Committee do not consider it any part of their duty, to suggest the
mode, by which the capital, necessary for these operations, may be
raised; yet it is their conviction, that in a financial point of view,
the enterprise would be a safe one.—A fire tax, levied upon real estate,
would meet the interest of half the capital; and the other half would be
more than met, by the revenue derivable from consumers.

The Committee present the above view of the case, as the best practical
solution of a perplexing problem which, at this time, occurs to their
minds,—reserving to themselves, of course, the right to adopt any more
feasible plan that may be suggested.

As a preliminary step, however, and taking all the circumstances into
consideration, the Committee finally recommend:

That the City Council shall, forthwith, or as soon as may be
convenient—consult some competent and experienced Engineer, whose advice
and opinions may enable the Council to decide, what is best to be done,
in order to accomplish the desired end.

This course was adopted by the city of St. John, in like circumstances;
as well as by Montreal and Quebec; and from the Report, lately
published, it appears, that a precisely similar course was pursued, by
the Common Council of Glasgow, before they embarked in that splendid
scheme, by which they have recently introduced the water into the city
from Loch Katrine.

The Committee cannot be supposed to know, and do not pretend to know,
more of the matter under discussion than many of their fellow-citizens.
They have endeavoured to discharge a very difficult task to the best of
their ability, in the hope that such measures will ultimately be adopted
by the Council, in reference to the supply of water, as will meet the
expectations, and satisfy the present and future demands, of the whole
community.

In conclusion, the Committee have to acknowledge the friendly
co-operation and assistance of His Worship the Mayor, the Chairman and
Ex-Chairman of Firewards, Mr. Muir, Superintendent of the Halifax Water
Works, and of several members of the Fire Department. They have also to
tender their thanks to F. W. Lincoln, Junr., Esq., Mayor of Boston, and
John M. Walker, Esq., Commissioner of Water Works at St. John, New
Brunswick, for much valuable information, furnished with obliging
promptitude.

                               All of which is respectfully submitted,
                                                     JOHN A. BELL,
                                                             _Chairman_.

 HALIFAX, N. S., 2ND DECEMBER, 1859.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors.
 2. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Report of a special committee of the
City Council, on the improvement of , by City Council Halifax (N.S.)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ***

***** This file should be named 53803-0.txt or 53803-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/8/0/53803/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

